We left off last discussing rendering
with server components where
we talked about difference between
server components and SSR.
When to use server components, where you
might confine the RFC or the request for
comments on the original proposal for
server components on the React team,
which I do recommend reading
a lot of context there.
They have some videos and conferences,
conference talks that you
should check out as well.
So, highly recommend it only because
I've looked at them myself and
I've learned a lot.
It's very enlightening.
So, but what about client components?
Well, we talked a lot about client
components, and just to rephrase again.
Client components are just the regular
components that you've been using
this whole time and React.
And that's basically it.
They are now officially
called client components.
That's the official name.
And I think having that distinction
actually makes it easier,
because I remember when I was learning
Next.js, or even before Next.js,
I remember figuring out how to make
service site rendering with React before
there was even a Next.js.
It was very confusing to think about
where a component was gonna be rendered,
and when it was gonna be rendered and
how it was gonna be rendered?
And there was this whole concept of
universal JavaScript and it was like,
I don't know when this
component's gonna happen.
Well, now there's a client component,
and there's a server component.
So it's a lot easier to think about as far
as like the context in which these things
are gonna run.
There's still definitely some
complications around it and
frameworks like Next.js aim to solve those
complications or make it less difficult,
but at least there's a distinction around.
This is a client component,
this is a server component.
So, I'm also very curious to see what
other frameworks do now that React has
done client component, server components.
I think other frameworks might follow
as well just like they did with hooks.
So, we'll see,
I think there's gonna be a big change
in JavaScript ecosystem entirely.
But yeah, client components.
I have an example of how to use them.
But in reality, like I said,
they're literally the same
thing you've always used.
You just have to add
use clients at the top.
That's it,
there's nothing else different about them.
That's literally all you have to do.
And it's the exact same
stuff you've been doing.
So in the case of Next.js, those client
components can still be rendered on
the server statically, dynamically,
but they're not server components.
They're just client components
rendered on the server.
They don't support a sync data fetching,
they still can use client side API's
inside of them like hooks and
use effects and things like that,
because they're eventually going
to be hydrated on the client.
And taken over so, they are still actually
client components here's getting that
initial HTML on the server which is not
the same as server components that never
leave the server, they always stay there,
they can't have state,
they can do async data fetching,
they have access to code.
They're actually being
executed on the server, right?
Versus just the HTML being rendered.
So, when would you use client components?
Basically, if your components need hooks,
like useState and
useEffect, then you need
a client component.
You literally cannot use a server
component with those things.
So, if I try to go into the server
component here, let's go back here.
So, notice in his homepage,
we don't have use client anywhere,
so by default this should
be a server component.
So, if I tried to say, useState,
let's import useState here,
and I say state,
setState equals useState like this.
I just saved that.
Then I go back and right here,
medially because I didn't even refresh,
we already got there, right?
And you can see right here, you're
importing a component that needs useState.
It only works in a client component.
But none of its parents
are marked with use client.
So their server components by default.
So you kind of get an error right here,
from the React compiler,
the tool that's running React.
Yeah, you can't use this,
because how would it work?
There's no state on the server.
It's not rendering.
There's no reconciliation phase.
There's no dirty checking, there's none of
that client side optimization happening on
the server so
which is what the hook was created for.
So, yeah.
You also can't use class components for
server components.
So, if you are still
using class components,
those have to be client components,
because they don't work on the server.
I don't know if that's in the doc
somewhere, but I just ran into that.
I just happened to try it and
I was like, yeah, these don't work.
So yeah, you will get this error a lot.
So, don't rely on the error though.
Remember, if you need a hook,
it's probably a client.
If you need a DOM event,
Other than that, it's a server.
>> Based on this, I might be
misreading the error message, but
does this imply then
that any child component,
all of the component that has use client
as that directive will kind of by default,
the opposite into rendering on the client?
>> It's going to look for the nearest
parent with the use client, right?
So, if you can add a server
component to a client component,
as long as server component is
wrapped in a client component [LAUGH].
Right, so, I can't bring a server
component directly into a client component
without it first being wrapped in one,
right?
So, we can run through some
of these examples here, but
let me get through this last bit I got and
then we can run through how to
interchange some of those differently.
So you can see the different
error message,
because sometimes error messages are like,
I don't know.
But yeah, we'll see, okay.
Good question, though, okay?
So, when to use client versus server.
So I already talked about when to
use clients, when to use servers.
Now, I'm going to compare the two, but
it's mostly the same, but always use
server components for all your components
unless it falls into one or more of these.
It needs interactivity or
event listeners, like onClick, onChange.
It uses state and lifecycle effects,
useState( ), useReducer( ), useEffect( ).
It uses browser-only APIs.
It needs custom hooks that
depend on state, effects, or
browser-only APIs, and
then React class components.
Again, that's the only reason why you
would ever use client components.
I think the only other ones I could
think of that's i guess if you were
using something like Chakra,
some third party library, and
you really wanted to use it, and
they just haven't updated it to work for
server and client, then you have to
use client components for that too.
But that's just a lot more tedious.
You actually have to, every one of those
components you have to use, you have to
wrap in your own client component
that just returns that component.
Just to put the use client at the top.
So, I'm pretty sure someone's gonna
make a tool that does that for people
automatically, so they don't have to do
it, because that just sounds annoying.
So, they actually wanted to do that.
So, if anybody wants to make something
make that, it'll be very helpful.
So, it's like use this babel plugin to
wrap third party libraries with the use
client, and it just works by default
that actually really cool, okay.
Let's run through some examples, okay.
One thing you might not know is that we
could just make a new folder on the and
let's say we call it components.
You can use server and
client components in this folder too,
not because it's called components, but
because they're eventually going to be
imported in the app directory, which
supports server and client components.
So your components don't have
to live in the app directory.
They just eventually have to be pulled in
here eventually through another component
or directly.
And that's how they are able to have
access to server and client components.
Whereas, if they were imported
in the pages directory,
they would not be able to do server and
client components,
they would instead use Next.js 12,
which does get service props and
get static props, yes.
So, that's the difference.
So, highly recommend only using
the pages directory for the API,
not the pages, and
use the app directory for all the pages.
If you're using Next.js 13, reason 12,
you will never even use the app directory.
You will only use the pages directory.
Okay, so let's see some examples.
So for components,
let's make a server component here.
So, we'll make a component,
that's like a header.
All right, so we have a header here.
Something like this, Whoops.
I got a header here.
And it's nothing special,
it's just a header.
Like that and some logo or
something like that, right?
So, I didn't put use client, so
by default this is gonna be a server.
I didn't put use client, right?
So now, if I want to bring this into any
other component in the app directory,
let's say page,
I can just import it, Like that.
And then I can just add it here, wherever
I want, just like any other component.
It's no different, there we go.
And I can go check it out.
I still have you stayed in there.
Yeah, I do, sorry.
There we go.
So there you go.
There is our logo with our header,
it's there.
So, importing a server component into
another server component, it just works.
You don't have to do anything about it.
Now, let's say I make
the header a client component.
So, i'm going to go to the header and
I'm going to say, use client.
All right, let's try that.
Now, what happens if I refresh this?
Nothing, it still works.
What's actually happening in
the background is that this component's
actually being hydrated and
filled in on the front end.
You just can't see it because it's
a small component that's not doing any
data fetching.
So it just happens instantly.
And I'm a local host, but
if this component was fetching data and
I wasn't on local host, it would pop in
much later than the rest of the page did.
So, because it's a client component, okay?
So, another example is what if
we use a client component, or
what if we use a server component
in a client component, right?
So, let's try that.
So let's make another server component
inside our components folder.
And we'll call this HeaderLink,
something like that.
All right, so we say HeaderLink,
It's gonna copy this.
That HeaderLink, and
it's just gonna be a div.
Just header link.
And then we'll make it a server component.
So, I'll get rid of
these clients like that.
And then I'm going to import it into our
client component which is the header,
let's see what happens.
So, your HeaderLink here.
And I'm going to save it.
So before I go, refresh,
anyone want to guess what they think
is going to happen if I try to do this?
>> It'll get rendered on the client
because it's immediate parent is
a client app.
Unless I'm totally wrong.
>> That's logical.
Yeah, that makes sense.
Anyone else wanna try?
I'm not saying you're wrong.
Just wanna know if anyone
had any other thoughts.
>> That's what I would've guessed as well.
>> Yeah, okay, let's see what happens.
Yeah, it's exactly what happens.
Yeah, it handles that for you,
because it's immediate parent is a client.
So it kinda just works out.
And these examples are trivial.
But once we get into like fetching data,
and you see how we can load them in and
parallel or after each other and
things like that,
it's gonna start making more sense because
we're not fetching any data right now.
This is all just like why we just make all
this stuff servers just like read only
data, but once we start fetching data,
you'll see the intention behind this whole
new concept of server versus client.
Because that's what it comes
down to is fetching data and
how much JavaScript you're
sitting to the front end.
That's really what all this is about and
then also just like taking advantage
of Async React using suspense and
stuff like that, which I think a lot of
people just haven't taken advantage of
because it's quite honestly,
really hard to wrap your head around.
So, Next.js also has a really good
guide in their documentation on common
pitfalls to look out for
when you're trying to import
a client component in the server
component or vice versa.
They're really weird use
case ones to check out.
So, check them out if you want to.